feat(doc): Improve guide to dataset types with better examples (#2286)
OpenAccess-AI-Collective/axolotl: docs/dataset-formats/index.qmd

## [Pre-training](pretraining.qmd)

When aiming to train on large corpuses of text datasets, pre-training is your go-to choice. As these datasets are large, Axolotl enables streaming for these datasets to only load batches into memory at a time.

A sample file for a pre-training dataset is as follows:

```json
{"text": "first row"}
{"text": "second row"}
...
```

It is typically recommended to save your dataset as `.jsonl` due to its flexibility and simplicity.

Axolotl supports loading from a Huggingface hub repo or from local files.

::: {.callout-important}
For pre-training only, Axolotl would split texts if it exceeds the context length into multiple smaller prompts.
:::

### Pre-training load from Huggingface hub

To load from Huggingface dataset `hf_org/name`, you can pass the following config:

```yaml
pretraining_dataset: hf_org/name
```

### Pre-training load from local files

Given a few corpus files: `A.jsonl`, `B.jsonl`, and `C.jsonl`, your config will look like the below:

```yaml
pretraining_dataset:
  - path: json

>     data_files: ["A.jsonl", "B.jsonl", "C.jsonl"]

Reviewer: Might this be better formatted as a multiline list?

>     data_files: ["A.jsonl", "B.jsonl", "C.jsonl"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    data_files:
      - A.jsonl
      - B.jsonl
      - C.jsonl
```

##### Choosing `chat_template`

There are a lot of `chat_templates` out there. Axolotl supports the common ones: [supported chat templates](https://github.com/axolotl-ai-cloud/axolotl/blob/860609392184cf62a7e0ca676658b170e059ce6c/src/axolotl/utils/chat_templates.py#L17). For example, to use ChatML, it would be `chat_template: chatml`.

However, it is also possible to use the already configured template within the tokenizer by specifying `chat_template: tokenizer_default`. If you want a fallback (in case some tokenizer does not have it pre-configured), you can do `chat_template: tokenizer_default_fallback_chatml` to use the tokenizer or fallback to ChatML.

One last but powerful approach is to bring your own template. This can be set via:

```yaml
chat_template_jinja: # your template
```

##### Setting `chat_template` dataset keys

We currently default to OpenAI format for dataset keys, so if that's your current dataset format, there's nothing to do here.

If your dataset format is different, here are the keys you should check (with their defaults):

```yaml
    field_messages: messages
    message_field_role: role
    message_field_content: content

> ```

Reviewer: It might not be clear that this is a section of a dataset object in a list

---
title: Dataset Formats
description: Guide to Dataset Formats in Axolotl
back-to-top-navigation: true
toc: true
toc-depth: 5
---

Axolotl is a training framework that aims to make the process convenient yet flexible to users by simply passing a config yaml file.

As there are a lot of available options in Axolotl, this guide aims to provide an simplify the user experience to choosing the proper choice.

> Axolotl supports 3 kind of training methods: pre-training, supervised fine-tuning, and preference tuning. Each method has their own dataset format which are described below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Axolotl supports 3 kinds of training methods: pre-training, supervised fine-tuning, and preference-based post-training (e.g. DPO, ORPO, PRMs). Each method has their own dataset format which are described below.
```

## [Pre-training](pretraining.qmd)

> When aiming to train on large corpuses of text datasets, pre-training is your go-to choice. As these datasets are large, Axolotl enables streaming for these datasets to only load batches into memory at a time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When aiming to train on large corpora of text datasets, pre-training is your go-to choice. Due to the size of these datasets, downloading the entire-datasets before beginning training would be prohibitively time-consuming. Axolotl supports [streaming](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/en/stream) to only load batches into memory at a time.
```

> A sample file for a pre-training dataset is as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A sample format for a pre-training dataset is as follows:
```

```json
{"text": "first row"}
{"text": "second row"}
...
```

> It is typically recommended to save your dataset as `.jsonl` due to its flexibility and simplicity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Is this phrase too general? Should I rephrase it to mean, as a good starter or at least over JSON?

We've had users with JSON datasets that won't properly load, however, switching to JSONL solves it.

Reviewer 2: I just thought it looked kind of strange up here and might belong in the local datasets section - but your call! It's an important point to highlight

> Axolotl supports loading from a Huggingface hub repo or from local files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Axolotl supports loading from a Hugging Face hub repo or from local files.
```

::: {.callout-important}
For pre-training only, Axolotl would split texts if it exceeds the context length into multiple smaller prompts.
:::

> ### Pre-training load from Huggingface hub

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pre-training from Hugging Face hub datasets
```

> To load from Huggingface dataset `hf_org/name`, you can pass the following config:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, to train using a Hugging Face dataset `hf_org/name`, you can pass the following config:
```

```yaml
pretraining_dataset: hf_org/name
```

> ### Pre-training load from local files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pre-training from local dataset files
```

Given a few corpus files: `A.jsonl`, `B.jsonl`, and `C.jsonl`, your config will look like the below:

```yaml
pretraining_dataset:
  - path: json
    data_files:
      - A.jsonl
      - B.jsonl
      - C.jsonl
```

While we recommend `.jsonl`, you can also use the other formats (`csv`, `parquet`, `arrow`, `SQL`, `Webdataset`) that are supported by [`Dataset.load_dataset`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/loading#local-and-remote-files)

### Pre-training without streaming

On the rare case that the dataset is small and can be loaded entirely into memory, another approach to running pre-training is to use the `completion` format. This would mean that the entire dataset is pre-tokenized instead of on-demand in streaming.

> One benefit of this is that: the tokenization can be performed separately on a CPU-only machine then transferred to a GPU machine for training to save costs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One benefit of this is that the tokenization can be performed separately on a CPU-only machine, and then transferred to a GPU machine for training to save costs.
```

> From huggingface:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From Hugging Face:
```

```yaml
datasets:

>   - path: A.jsonl

Reviewer 2: Is this right?

Author: Nope, fixed.

    type: completion
```

From local files:

```yaml
datasets:
  - path: json
    data_files: ["A.jsonl", "B.jsonl", "C.jsonl"]
    type: completion
```

> ### Before running pre-train

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Pre-training dataset configuration tips
```
maybe? up to you

#### Setting max_steps

> As the dataset is streamed, Axolotl does not know in advance how large the dataset is and does not know when to stop.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using streaming for large datasets, Axolotl does not know in advance how large the dataset is and does not know when to stop.
```

Therefore, it is necessary to set `max_steps: int` in your config for pre-training to run, so that Axolotl knows when to stop training.

One step is equal to `sequence_len * micro_batch_size * gradient_accumulation_steps * total_num_gpus` tokens.

#### Group_by_length

> It is recommended to leave this off if downloading from Huggingface hub as it would download the entire dataset which can be very large.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is recommended to leave this off if downloading from Hugging Face hub as it would download the entire dataset which can be very large.
```

## Supervised fine-tuning (SFT)

Supervised fine-tuning is the process of training models to respond to an instruction or chat input.

> As there are a wide variety of dataset formats, Axolotl tries to support or opens up the option to use a majority of the formats available in public datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As there are a wide variety of dataset formats, Axolotl tries to support a majority of the formats available in public datasets.
```

> Axolotl provide four various approaches for loading datasets, however, it's easier to work backwards from the dataset you have available to figure out which approach to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Axolotl provides four approaches for loading datasets, however, it's easier to work backwards from the dataset you have available to figure out which approach to use.
```

> A flow chart is as follows:

Reviewer 2: This is great : )

1. Do you already have the dataset tokenized? If yes, check [Pre-Tokenized Dataset](#pre-tokenized-dataset).

2. Do you want to format the dataset yourself and manually choose each section to mask? If yes, check [Template Free Dataset](#template-free-dataset)

3. Is your dataset in a "conversation" format, containing a `list[messages]`? If yes, check [Conversation Dataset](#conversation-dataset)

4. Is your dataset in an "instruct" format, containing `{ instruction, response }`? If yes, check [Instruction Dataset](#instruction-dataset)

If you went through the flow chart and did not find one that matches, it is recommended to preprocess your dataset into one of the above or create a Github Discussion.

::: {.callout-tip}
You can mix and match within each approach or across approaches to train a model on a variety of datasets.
:::

### [Pre-Tokenized Dataset](tokenized.qmd)

> This approach is when you want to bring your own tokenized dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We suggest this approach when you want to bring your own tokenized dataset.
```

Axolotl expects the dataset to have three keys:
- `input_ids`: from tokenizing formatted prompt
- `attention_mask`: for masking padding. If you don't add padding, it would be equal to `len(input_ids) * [1]`
- `labels`: this is the same as `input_ids`, however, if you want to mask certain tokens, you would set those indices to `-100`.

> Don't forget to add BOS/EOS and proper masking for it!

Reviewer 2: Could you elaborate here more?

Author: Thanks, I've updated it.

A config for this would look like:

```yaml
datasets:
  - path: A.jsonl
    type:
```

::: {.callout-note}
`type: ` is empty!
:::

### [Template Free Dataset](template_free.qmd)

> This approach is if you want granular control over the prompt formatting, special tokens, and masking while letting Axolotl handle the tokenization. This is very useful if your dataset have unique prompts that differ within, where one single general template wouldn't suffice for.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We reccomend this approach when you want granular control over the prompt formatting, special tokens, and masking, whilst letting Axolotl handle the tokenization. This is very useful if your dataset has unique prompts that differ across samples and where one single general template wouldn't suffice.
```

> In the example below, you could see that there is no proper structure. In the same time, it's very flexible as there are no constraints on how your prompt can look.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the example below, you could see that there is no proper structure. At the same time, it's very flexible as there are no constraints on how your prompt can look.
```

```json
{
    "segments": [
        {
            "label": true,
            "text": "<s>Hello\n"
        },
        {
            "label": true,
            "text": "hi there!. "
        },
        {
            "label": false,
            "text": "goodbye "
        },
        {
            "label": true,
            "text": "farewell</s>"
        }
    ]
}
```

Each prompt must be have a key called `segments` which is a list of `{ text, label }`.

```yaml
datasets:
  - path: A.jsonl
    type: input_output
```

### [Conversation Dataset](conversation.qmd)

`conversation` messages are a list of messages which usually contain a `role` and `content` key.

::: {.callout-tip}

> Fun fact: Axolotl synonymously call "chat" messages as `conversation` messages due to how FastChat initially used this term to build a widely used method [fastchat conversation](https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat/blob/main/fastchat/conversation.py) for formatting chat messages prior to the creation of `chat_templates`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fun fact: Axolotl synonymously refers to "chat" messages as `conversation` messages due to how FastChat initially used this term to build a widely used [fastchat conversation](https://github.com/lm-sys/FastChat/blob/main/fastchat/conversation.py) method for formatting chat messages prior to the creation of `chat_templates`.
```

:::

#### What are `chat_templates`?

> The current most popular and convenient method for inference is to use `chat_templates` for formatting prompts. Therefore, Axolotl supports using `chat_templates` for training to ensure that the model performs in the same environment as in inference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current most popular and convenient method for inference is to use `chat_templates` for formatting prompts. Axolotl supports using `chat_templates` for training to ensure that the model performs in the same environment as in inference.
```

> Here's a quick rundown on `chat_template`. A `chat_template` is a Jinja2 template which formats a list of messages into a prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here's a quick rundown on `chat_template`: A `chat_template` is a Jinja2 template which formats a list of messages into a prompt.
```

An example of a prompt formatted into a popular template called ChatML can be seen below:

Single prompt (pretty-printed):
```json
{
    "messages": [
        {
            "role": "user",
            "content": "Hi"
        },
        {
            "role": "assistant",
            "content": "How can I help you?"
        },
        {
            "role": "user",
            "content": "Can you add 3+5?"
        },
        {
            "role": "assistant",
            "content": "The answer is 8."
        }
    ]
}
```

The ChatML template is as follows:
```jinja2
{% if not add_generation_prompt is defined %}{% set add_generation_prompt = false %}{% endif %}{% for message in messages %}{{'<|im_start|>' + message['role'] + '\n' + message['content'] + '<|im_end|>' + '\n'}}{% endfor %}{% if add_generation_prompt %}{{ '<|im_start|>assistant\n' }}{% endif %}
```

> Formatted prompt into ChatML

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above prompt formatted into this template will result in:
```

```
<|im_start|>user
Hi<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>assistant
How can I help you?<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>user
Can you add 3+5?<|im_end|>
<|im_start|>assistant
The answer is 8.<|im_end|>
```

By using delimiters (`<|im_start|>` and `<|im_end|>`), a prompt separates different speakers which helps the model identify which portion belongs to whom.

#### Common Conversation Dataset formats

Older conversation datasets with the following format are colloquially called `sharegpt` datasets.

```json
{"conversations": [{"from": "...", "value": "..."}]}
```

Newer conversation datasets usually follow the OpenAI format.

```json
{"messages": [{"role": "...", "content": "..."}]}
```

Axolotl supports both as well as allowing customization of any kind of key.

#### [Chat Template Usage](conversation.qmd#chat_template)

To properly use this method, it is important to identify three things:

1. Which `chat_template` would you use?

> 2. What are the keys in your dataset, and what are the possible roles? For example, in OpenAI format, the keys would be `messages`, `role`, `content` respectively, whereas the possible roles are `system`, `user`, and `assistant`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. What are the keys in your dataset, and what are the possible roles? For example, in OpenAI format, the keys would be `messages`, `role`, and `content`, respectively, whereas the possible roles are `system`, `user`, and `assistant`.
```
I also don't fully understand the last section "whereas the possible roles are `system`, `user`, and `assistant`."

3. What do you want to mask? For instance, only assistant messages, only last message, or nothing.

> ##### Choosing `chat_template`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Choosing a `chat_template`
```

There are a lot of `chat_templates` out there. Axolotl supports the common ones: [supported chat templates](https://github.com/axolotl-ai-cloud/axolotl/blob/860609392184cf62a7e0ca676658b170e059ce6c/src/axolotl/utils/chat_templates.py#L17). For example, to use ChatML, it would be `chat_template: chatml`.

> However, it is also possible to use the already configured template within the tokenizer by specifying `chat_template: tokenizer_default`. If you want a fallback (in case some tokenizer does not have it pre-configured), you can do `chat_template: tokenizer_default_fallback_chatml` to use the tokenizer or fallback to ChatML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it is also possible to use the already configured template within the tokenizer by specifying `chat_template: tokenizer_default`. If you want a fallback (in case some tokenizer does not have it pre-configured), you can do `chat_template: tokenizer_default_fallback_chatml` to fallback to the ChatML template if a tokenizer template was not found.
```

> One last but powerful approach is to bring your own template. This can be set via:

Reviewer 2: Is there a more concrete example of this?

Author: Do you mean example of a tokenizer without chat_template or an example of a jinja2 template?

```yaml
chat_template_jinja: # your template
```

##### Setting `chat_template` dataset keys

We currently default to OpenAI format for dataset keys, so if that's your current dataset format, there's nothing to do here.

If your dataset format is different, here are the keys you should check (with their defaults):

```yaml
datasets:
    ...
    field_messages: messages
    message_field_role: role
    message_field_content: content
```

> In some `chat_templates` (like `gemma`), the roles are hardcoded to `user` and `assistant`. Consequently, you may find it necessary to map the roles in your dataset to these above. We currently have some defaults that should work for common datasets, but if you get a `KeyError`, it would be necessary to add mapping for your roles. Here is an example of how it would look like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some `chat_templates` (e.g. [Gemma](https://huggingface.co/google/gemma-2b-it/blob/main/tokenizer_config.json#L1507)), the roles are hardcoded to `user` and `assistant`. Consequently, you may find it necessary to map the roles in your dataset to these above. We currently have some defaults that should work for common datasets, but if you get a `KeyError`, it would be necessary to add mapping for your roles. Here is an example of how it would look like:
```

```yaml
datasets:
    ...
    roles:
      assistant:
        - gpt
        - model
      user:
        - human
```

In the example above, all `gpt` and `model` values are converted to `assistant`. All `human` values are converted to `user.`

##### Handling masking

> The common use case for `chat_template` is for chat messages, therefore, it is common to mask all non-assistant messages. Assistant messages refer to the bot messages that you want the model to learn as.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The common use case for `chat_template` is for chat messages, therefore, it is common to mask all non-assistant messages. Assistant messages refer to the bot messages that you want the model to learn on.
```

To train on all `assistant` messages, you would set the following configs.

```yaml
datasets:
    ...
    roles_to_train: ["assistant"]
    train_on_eos: "turn"
```

> The second config means that it would mask all EOS tokens for turns that aren't assistant-turns. The other options are: `all` and `last` to choose which EOS to train on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This config means that it would mask all EOS tokens for turns that aren't assistant-turns. The other options are: `all` and `last` to choose which EOS to train on.
```

Perhaps, you want to train on `assistant` and `narrator` roles, you can simply add `narrator` to the list of `roles_to_train`. You would also need to add it to the mapping of `roles` above.

```yaml
datasets:
    ...

>     roles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    roles_to_train: ["narrator"]
    roles:
```

      narrator: ["narrator"]
```

#### Applying `chat_template`

> Once all the above are completed, you would combine all these configs together to form your dataset config. The last part would be to set the EOS token in the config to ensure that the code knows what your EOS token is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once all the above steps are completed, you could combine all these configs together to form a bespoke configuration for your  custom dataset. The final step would be to correctly set the EOS token in your config: 
```

	# step 2
	field_messages: messages
    message_field_role: role
    message_field_content: content

    roles:
      assistant:
        - gpt
        - model
        - assistant
      user:
        - human
        - user

	# step 3
	roles_to_train: ["assistant"]
    train_on_eos: "turn"

special_tokens:
  eos_token: <|im_end|>
```

If this config were to be applied to the sample dataset above, the output would look as such (which can be retrieved via `axolotl preprocess config.yaml --debug`):

```
<|im_start|>(-100, 128256) user(-100, 882)
(-100, 198) Hi(-100, 13347) <|im_end|>(-100, 128257)
(-100, 198) <|im_start|>(-100, 128256) assistant(-100, 78191)
(-100, 198) How(4438, 4438)  can(649, 649)  I(358, 358)  help(1520, 1520)  you(499, 499) ?(30, 30) <|im_end|>(128257, 128257)
(-100, 198) <|im_start|>(-100, 128256) user(-100, 882)
(-100, 198) Can(-100, 6854)  you(-100, 499)  add(-100, 923)  (-100, 220) 3(-100, 18) +(-100, 10) 5(-100, 20) ?(-100, 30) <|im_end|>(-100, 128257)
(-100, 198) <|im_start|>(-100, 128256) assistant(-100, 78191)
(-100, 198) The(791, 791)  answer(4320, 4320)  is(374, 374)  (220, 220) 8(23, 23) .(13, 13) <|im_end|>(128257, 128257)
(-100, 198)
```

> The first number refers to the label, the second refers to the token_id. For example, `-100` labels appears on non-assistant portions, meaning that it's masked. For assistant portions, the label is the same as the token_id.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first number refers to the label, the second refers to the `token_id`. For example, `-100` labels appear on non-assistant portions, meaning that they are masked during. For assistant portions, the label is the same as the `token_id`.
```

### [Instruction Dataset](inst_tune.qmd)

> An Instruction dataset is a kind of dataset which focuses on instruction and output, a single turn instead of multi-turn conversations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instruction dataset are used to train instruction-following models and comprise a prompt, containing an instruction, and a single response which contains a successful response to the instruction. In contrast to chat datasets which may be multi-turn, an instruct datasets are typically single-turn.
```

Due to the myriad possibilities of instruction formats, Axolotl allows customizing your own instruction format without having to dive into the code directly.

In the example below, a sample row is used to output in `mistral_v1` format.
```json
{"input": "...", "output": "..."}
```

```yaml
datasets:
  - path: repo
    type:
      system_prompt: ""

      field_system:
      field_instruction: input
      field_input:
      field_output: output

      # multi-line example with input
      format: |-
        [INST] {instruction} {input} [/INST]

      # single-line example without input
      no_input_format: "[INST] {instruction} [/INST]"
```

The config sets that the `field_instruction` is actually named `input`, and the `field_input` is empty as we don't have an `input` in this sample. Generally, `instruction` can be thought as the question to the model, and `input` as the additional information with `output` being the response. It is not necessary to have an `input` nor `system`. In the end, the most important part is to understand what format you want it to look like and how you can customize this to your use case.

## Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)

> As there are multiple RLHF methods with their own dataset requirements. Please see RLHF doc [here](../rlhf.qmd).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As there are multiple RLHF methods with their own dataset requirements. Please see [RLHF datasets](../rlhf.qmd) documentation for more detail.
```
